<BOS> Because I cannot sleep I make music at night. I am troubled by the one whose face e has the color of spring flowers. I have neither sleep nor patience, neither a god reputation nor disgrace. A thousand robes of wisdom are gone. All my good manners have moved a thousand miles away. The heart and the mind are left angry with each other. The starts and the moon are envious of each other. Because of this alienation the physical universe is getting tighter and tighter. The moon says, “How long will I remain suspended without a sun?” Without Love’s jewel inside of me, let the bazaar of my existence by destroyed stone by stone. O Love, You who have been called by a thousand names, You who know how to pour the wine into the chalice of the body, You who give culture to a thousand cultures, You who are faceless but have a thousand faces, O Love, You who shape the faces of Turks, Europeans, and Zanzibaris, give me a glass from Your bottle, or a handful of bheng from Your Branch. Remove the cork once more. The we’ll see a thousand chiefs prostrate themselves, and a circle of ecstatic troubadours will play. Then the addict will be breed of craving. and will be resurrected, and stand in awe till Judgement Day.  Ode 314  Those who don’t feel this Love pulling them like a river, those who don’t drink dawn like a cup of spring water or take in sunset like supper, those who don’t want to change,  let them sleep.  This Love is beyond the study of theology, that old trickery and hypocrisy. I you want to improve your mind that way,  sleep on.  I’ve given up on my brain. I’ve torn the cloth to shreds and thrown it away.  If you’re not completely naked, wrap your beautiful robe of words around you,  and sleep. <EOS>
<BOS> This is love: to fly toward a secret sky,  to cause a hundred veils to fall each moment.  First, to let go of live.  In the end, to take a step without feet;  to regard this world as invisible,  and to disregard what appears to be the self.  Heart, I said, what a gift it has been  to enter this circle of lovers,  to see beyond seeing itself,  to reach and feel within the breast. <EOS>
<BOS> You come to us from another world  From beyond the stars and void of space. Transcendent, Pure, Of unimaginable beauty, Bringing with you the essence of love  You transform all who are touched by you. Mundane concerns, troubles, and sorrows dissolve in your presence, Bringing joy to ruler and ruled To peasant and king  You bewilder us with your grace. All evils transform into goodness.  You are the master alchemist.  You light the fire of love in earth and sky in heart and soul of every being.  Through your love existence and nonexistence merge. All opposites unite. All that is profane becomes sacred again. <EOS>
<BOS> Love is reckless; not reason.  Reason seeks a profit.  Love comes on strong,  consuming herself, unabashed.  Yet, in the midst of suffering,  Love proceeds like a millstone,  hard surfaced and straightforward.  Having died of self-interest,  she risks everything and asks for nothing.  Love gambles away every gift God bestows.  Without cause God gave us Being;  without cause, give it back again. <EOS>
<BOS> A lifetime without Love is of no account  Love is the Water of Life  Drink it down with heart and soul! <EOS>
<BOS> Love is the One who masters all things; I am mastered totally by Love. By my passion of love for Love I have ground sweet as sugar. O furious Wind, I am only a straw before you; How could I know where I will be blown next? Whoever claims to have made a pact with Destiny Reveals himself a liar and a fool; What is any of us but a straw in a storm? How could anyone make a pact with a hurricane? God is working everywhere his massive Resurrection; How can we pretend to act on our own? In the hand of Love I am like a cat in a sack; Sometimes Love hoists me into the air, Sometimes Love flings me into the air, Love swings me round and round His head; I have no peace, in this world or any other. The lovers of God have fallen in a furious river; They have surrendered themselves to Love’s commands. Like mill wheels they turn, day and night, day and night, Constantly turning and turning, and crying out. <EOS>
<BOS> In the early dawn of happiness you gave me three kisses so that I would wake up to this moment of love  I tried to remember in my heart what I’d dreamt about during the night before I became aware of this moving of life  I found my dreams but the moon took me away It lifted me up to the firmament and suspended me there I saw how my heart had fallen on your path singing a song  Between my love and my heart things were happening which slowly slowly made me recall everything  You amuse me with your touch although I can’t see your hands. You have kissed me with tenderness although I haven’t seen your lips You are hidden from me.  But it is you who keeps me alive  Perhaps the time will come when you will tire of kisses I shall be happy even for insults from you I only ask that you keep some attention on me. <EOS>
<BOS> That moon, which the sky ne’er saw even in dreams, has returned And brought a fire no water can quench. See the body’ s house, and see my. soul, This made drunken and that desolate by the cup of his love. When the host of the tavern became my heart-mate, My blood turned to wine and my heart to kabab. When the eye is filled with thought of him, a voice arrives : W ell done, O flagon, and bravo, wine! Love’s fingers tear up, root and stem, Every house where sunbeams fall from love. When my heart saw love’s sea, of a sudden It left me and leaped in, crying, , Find me.’ The face of Shamsi Din, Tabriz’s glory, is the sun In whose track the cloud-like hearts are moving. <EOS>
<BOS> This is love: to fly to heaven, every moment to rend a hundred veils; At first instance, to break away from breath — first step, to renounce feet; To disregard this world, to see only that which you yourself have seen6 . I said, “Heart, congratulations on entering the circle of lovers, “On gazing beyond the range of the eye, on running into the alley of the breasts.” Whence came this breath, O heart? Whence came this throbbing, O heart? Bird, speak the tongue of birds: I can heed your cipher! The heart said, “I was in the factory whilst the home of water and clay was abaking. “I was flying from the workshop whilst the workshop was being created. “When I could no more resist, they dragged me; how shall I tell the manner of that dragging?” <EOS>
<BOS> Passion makes the old medicine new:  Passion lops off the bough of weariness.  Passion is the elixir that renews:  how can there be weariness  when passion is present?  Oh, don’t sigh heavily from fatigue:  seek passion, seek passion, seek passion! <EOS>
<BOS> The beauty of the heart  is the lasting beauty:  its lips give to drink  of the water of life. Truly it is the water,  that which pours,  and the one who drinks.  All three become one when  your talisman is shattered.  That oneness you can’t know  by reasoning. <EOS>
<BOS> show me your face i crave flowers and gardens open your lips i crave the taste of honey come out from behind the clouds i desire a sunny face your voice echoed saying “leave me alone” i wish to hear your voice again saying “leave me alone” i swear this city without you is a prison i am dying to get out to roam in deserts and mountains i am tired of flimsy friends and submissive companions i die to walk with the brave am blue hearing nagging voices and meek cries i desire loud music drunken parties and wild dance one hand holding a cup of wine one hand caressing your hair then dancing in orbital circle that is what i yearn for i can sing better than any nightingale but because of this city’s freaks i seal my lips while my heart weeps yesterday the wisest man holding a lit lantern in daylight was searching around town saying i am tired of all these beasts and brutes i seek a true human we have all looked for one but no one could be found they said yes he replied but my search is for the one who cannot be found <EOS>
<BOS> I saw my sweetheart wandering about the house; he had taken a rebec and was playing a melody. With a plectrum like fire he was playing a sweet melody, drunken and dissolute and charming from the Magian wine. He was invoking the saqi in the air of Iraq1 ; the wine was his object, the saqi was his excuse. The moonfaced saqi pitcher in his hand, entered from a corner and set it in the middle. He filled the first cup with that flaming wine; did you ever see water sending out flames? He set it on his hand for the sake of the lovers, then prostrated and kissed the threshold. My sweetheart seized it from him and quaffed the wine; flames from that wine went running over his face. He was beholding his own beauty, and saying to the evil eye, “Never has there been, nor shall there come in this age, another like me.” <EOS>
<BOS> I have come so that, tugging your ear, I may draw you to me, unheart and unself you, plant you in my heart and soul. Rosebush, I have come a sweet springtide unto you, to seize you very gently in my embrace and squeeze you. I have come to adorn you in this worldly abode, to convey you above the skies like lovers’ prayers. I have come because you stole a kiss from an idol fair; give it back with a glad heart, master, for I will seize you back. What is a mere rose? You are the All1, you are the speaker of the command “Say”2 . If no one else knows you, since you are I, I know you. You are my soul and spirit, you are my Fatiha-chanter3 , be- come altogether the Fatiha, so that I may chant you in my heart. You are my quarry and game, though you have sprung from the snare; return to the snare, and if you will not, I will drive you. The lion said to me, “You are a wonderous deer; be gone! Why do you run in my wake so swiftly? I will tear you to pieces.” Accept my blow, and advance like a hero’s shield; give your ear to naught but the bowstring, that I may bend you like a bow. So many thousand stages there are from earth’s bounds to man; I have brought you from city to city, I will not leave you by the roadside. Say nothing, froth not, do not raise the lid of the cauldron; simmer well, and be patient, for I am cooking you. No, for you are a lion’s whelp hidden in a deer’s body: I will cause you suddenly to transcend the deer’s veil. You are my ball, and you run in the curved mallet of my decree; though I am making you to run, I am still running in your track. <EOS>
<BOS> “I am only the house of your beloved,  not the beloved herself:  true love is for the treasure,  not for the coffer that contains it.”  The real beloved is that one who is unique,  who is your beginning and your end.  When you find that one,  you’ll no longer expect anything else:  that is both the manifest and the mystery.  That one is the lord of states of feeling,  dependent on none;  month and year are slaves to that moon.  When he bids the “state,”  it does His bidding;  when that one wills, bodies become spirit. <EOS>
<BOS> Who is at my door?  He said, “Who is at my door?” I said, “Your humble servant.” He said, “What business do you have?” I said, “To greet you, 0 Lord.”  He said, “How long will you journey on?” I said, “Until you stop me.” He said, “How long will you boil in the fire?” I said, “Until I am pure.  “This is my oath of love. For the sake of love I gave up wealth and position.”  He said, “You have pleaded your case but you have no witness.” I said, “My tears are my witness; the pallor of my face is my proof.’ He said, “Your witness has no credibility; your eyes are too wet to see.” I said, “By the splendor of your justice my eyes are clear and faultless.”  He said, “What do you seek?” I said, “To have you as my constant friend.” He said, “What do you want from me?” I said, “Your abundant grace.”  He said, “Who was your companion on the ‘ourney? I said, “The thought of you, 0 King.” He said, “What called you here?” I said, “The fragrance of your wine.”  He said, “What brings you the most fulfillment?” I said, “The company of the Emperor.” He said, “What do you find there?” I said, “A hundred miracles.” He said, “Why is the palace deserted?” I said, “They all fear the thief.” He said, “Who is the thief?” I said, “The one who keeps me from -you.  He said, “Where is there safety?” I said, “In service and renunciation.” He said, “What is there to renounce?” I said, “The hope of salvation.”  He said, “Where is there calamity?” I said, “In the presence of your love.” He said, “How do you benefit from this life?” I said, “By keeping true to myself  Now it is time for silence. If I told you about His true essence You would fly from your self and be gone, and neither door nor roof could hold you back! <EOS>
<BOS> Again I am raging, I am in such a state by your soul that every bond you bind, I break, by your soul. I am like heaven, like the moon, like a candle by your glow; I am all reason, all love, all soul, by your soul. My joy is of your doing, my hangover of your thorn; whatever side you turn your face, I turn mine, by your soul. I spoke in error; it is not surprising to speak in error in this state, for this moment I cannot tell cup from wine, by your soul. I am that madman in bonds who binds the “divs”; I, the madman, am a Solomon with the “divs”, by your soul. Whatever form other than love raises up its head from my heart, forthwith I drive it out of the court of my heart, by your soul. Come, you who have departed, for the thing that departs comes back; neither you are that, by my soul, nor I am that, by your soul. Disbeliever, do not conceal disbelief in your soul, for I will recite the secret of your destiny, by your soul. Out of love of Sham-e Tabrizi, through wakefulness or nightrising, like a spinning mote I am distraught, by your soul. <EOS>
<BOS> Let go of your worries  and be completely clear-hearted,  like the face of a mirror  that contains no images.  If you want a clear mirror,  behold yourself  and see the shameless truth,  which the mirror reflects.  If metal can be polished  to a mirror-like finish,  what polishing might the mirror  of the heart require?  Between the mirror and the heart  is this single difference:  the heart conceals secrets,  while the mirror does not. <EOS>
<BOS> Sweetly parading you go my soul of soul, go not without me; life of your friends, enter not the garden without me. Sky, revolve not without me; moon, shine not without me; earth travel not without me, and time, go not without me. With you this world is joyous, and with you that world is joyous; in this world dwell not without me, and to that world depart not without me. Vision, know not without me, and tongue, recite not without me; glance behold not without me, and soul, go not without me. The night through the moon’s light sees its face white; I am light, you are my moon, go not to heaven without me. The thorn is secure from the fire in the shelter of the roses face: you are the rose, I your thorn; go not into the rose garden without me. I run in the curve of your mallet when your eye is with me; even so gaze upon me, drive not without me, go not without me. When, joy, you are companion of the king, drink not without me; when, watchman, you go to the kings roof, go not without me. Alas for him who goes on this road without your sign; since you, O signless one, are my sign, go not without me. Alas for him who goes on the road without my knowledge; you are the knowledge of the road for me; O road-knower, go not without me. Others call you love, I call you the king of love; O you who are higher than the imagination of this and that, go not without me. <EOS>
<BOS> Last night you lfet me and slept  your own deep sleep. Tonight you turn  and turn. I say,  “You and I will be together  till the universe dissolves.”  You mumble back things you thought of  when you were drunk. <EOS>
<BOS> Stay close, my heart, to the one who knows your ways; Come into the shade of the tree that allays has fresh flowers. Don’t stroll idly through the bazaar of the perfume-markers: Stay in the shop of the sugar-seller. If you don’t find true balance, anyone can deceive you; Anyone can trick out of a thing of straw, And make you take it for gold Don’t squat with a bowl before every boiling pot; In each pot on the fire you find very different things. Not all sugarcanes have sugar, not all abysses a peak; Not all eyes possess vision, not every sea is full of pearls. O nightingale, with your voice of dark honey! Go on lamenting! Only your drunken ecstasy can pierce the rock’s hard heart! Surrender yourself, and if you cannot be welcomes by the Friend, Know that you are rebelling inwardly like a thread That doesn’t want to go through the needle’s eye! The awakened heart is a lamp; protect it by the him of your robe! Hurry and get out of this wind, for the weather is bad. And when you’ve left this storm, you will come to a fountain; You’ll find a Friend there who will always nourish your soul. And with your soul always green, you’ll grow into a tall tree Flowering always with sweet light-fruit, whose growth is interior. <EOS>
<BOS> Reason says, “I will beguile him with the tongue;” Love says, “Be silent. I will beguile him with the soul.” The soul says to the heart, “Go, do not laugh at me and yourself. What is there that is not his, that I may beguile him thereby?” He is not sorrowful and anxious and seeking oblivion that I may beguile him with wine and a heavy measure. The arrow of his glance needs not a bow that I should beguile the shaft of his gaze with a bow. He is not prisoner of the world, fettered to this world of earth, that I should beguile him with gold of the kingdom of the world. He is an angel, though in form he is a man; he is not lustful that I should beguile him with women. Angels start away from the house wherein this form is, so how should I beguile him with such a form and likeness? He does not take a flock of horses, since he flies on wings; his food is light, so how should I beguile him with bread? He is not a merchant and trafficker in the market of the world that I should beguile him with enchantment of gain and loss. He is not veiled that I should make myself out sick and utter sighs, to beguile him with lamentation. I will bind my head and bow my head, for I have got out of hand; I will not beguile his compassion with sickness or fluttering. Hair by hair he sees my crookedness and feigning; what’s hidden from him that I should beguile him with anything hidden. He is not a seeker of fame, a prince addicted to poets, that I should beguile him with verses and lyrics and flowing poetry. The glory of the unseen form is too great for me to beguile it with blessing or Paradise. Shams-e Tabriz, who is his chosen and beloved – perchance I will beguile him with this same pole of the age. <EOS>
<BOS> A strange passion is moving in my head. My heart has become a bird which searches in the sky. Every part of me goes in different directions. Is it really so that the one I love is everywhere? <EOS>
<BOS> Lover whispers to my ear, “Better to be a prey than a hunter. Make yourself My fool. Stop trying to be the sun and become a speck! Dwell at My door and be homeless. Don’t pretend to be a candle, be a moth, so you may taste the savor of Life and know the power hidden in serving.” <EOS>
<BOS> THROUGH LOVE all that is bitter will sweet Through Love all that is copper will be gold. Through Love all dregs will turn to purest wine Through Love all pain will turn to medicine. Through Love the dead will all become alive. Through Love the king will turn into a slave! <EOS>
<BOS> Reason says, I will beguile him with the tongue;” Love says, “Be silent. I will beguile him with the soul.” The soul says to the heart, “Go, do not laugh at me and yourself. What is there that is not his, that I may beguile him thereby?” He is not sorrowful and anxious and seeking oblivion that I may beguile him with wine and a heavy measure. The arrow of his glance needs not a bow that I should beguile the shaft of his gaze with a bow. He is not prisoner of the world, fettered to this world of earth, that I should beguile him with gold of the kingdom of the world. He is an angel, though in form he is a man; he is not lustful that I should beguile him with women. Angels start away from the house wherein this form is, so how should I beguile him with such a form and likeness? He does not take a flock of horses, since he flies on wings; his food is light, so how should I beguile him with bread? He is not a merchant and trafficker in the market of the world that I should beguile him with enchantment of gain and loss. He is not veiled that I should make myself out sick and utter sighs, to beguile him with lamentation. I will bind my head and bow my head, for I have got out of hand; I will not beguile his compassion with sickness or fluttering. Hair by hair he sees my crookedness and feigning; what’s hidden from him that I should beguile him with anything hidden. He is not a seeker of fame, a prince addicted to poets, that I should beguile him with verses and lyrics and flowing poetry. The glory of the unseen form is too great for me to beguile it with blessing or Paradise. Shams-e Tabriz, who is his chosen and beloved – perchance I will beguile him with this same pole of the age. <EOS>
<BOS> Last night, I was lying on the rooftop, thinking of you. I saw a special Star, and summoned her to take you a message. I prostrated myself to the Star and asked her to take my prostration to that Sun of Tabriz. So that with his light, he can turn my dark stones into gold. I opened my chest and showed her my scars, I told her to bring me news of my bloodthirsty Lover. As I waited, I paced back and forth, until the child of my heart became quiet. The child slept, as if I were rocking his cradle. Oh Beloved, give milk to the infant of the heart, and don’t hold us from our turning. You have cared for hundreds, don’t let it stop with me now. At the end, the town of unity is the place for the heart. Why do you keep this bewildered heart in the town of dissolution? I have gone speechless, but to rid myself of this dry mood, oh Saaqhi, pass the narcissus of the wine. <EOS>
<BOS> Love has nothing to do with  the five senses and the six directions:  its goal is only to experience  the attraction exerted by the Beloved.  Afterwards, perhaps, permission  will come from God:  the secrets that ought to be told with be told  with an eloquence nearer to the understanding  that these subtle confusing allusions.  The secret is partner with none  but the knower of the secret:  in the skeptic’s ear  the secret is no secret at all. <EOS>
<BOS> Lovers  O lovers, lovers it is time to set out from the world. I hear a drum in my soul’s ear coming from the depths of the stars. Our camel driver is at work; the caravan is being readied. He asks that we forgive him for the disturbance he has caused us, He asks why we travelers are asleep.  Everywhere the murmur of departure; the stars, like candles thrust at us from behind blue veils, and as if to make the invisible plain, a wondrous people have come forth. <EOS>
<BOS> O SUN, fill our house once more with light! Make happy all your friends and blind your foes! Rise from behind the hill, transform the stones To rubies and the sour grapes to wine! O Sun, make our vineyard fresh again, And fill the steppes with houris and green cloaks! Physician of the lovers, heaven’s lamp! Rescus the lovers! Help the suffering! Show but your face – the world is filled with light! But if you cover it, it’s the darkest night! <EOS>
<BOS> FROM MYSELF I am copper, through You, friend, I am gold. From myself I’m a stone, but through You I am a gem! <EOS>
<BOS> It is the rule with drunkards to fall upon one another, to fight and squabble and make tumult. The lover is worse than the drunkard; the lover also belongs to that party. I will tell what love is; it is to fall into a goldmine. What may that gold be? The lover is the king of kings; it means becoming secure from death and not caring for the golden crown. The darvish in his cloak, and in his pocket the pearl – why should he be ashamed of begging from door to door? Last night that moon came along, having flung his girdle on the road, so drunken that he was not aware that his girdle had fallen. I said, “Leap up, my heart, place wine in the hand of the soul; for such a time has befallen, it is time to be roistering. “To become hand in hand with the garden nightingale, to fall into sugar with the spiritual parrot.” I, heart-forlorn and heart-yielded, fallen upon your way – by Allah, I know of no other place to fall. If I broke your bowl, I am drunk, my idol. I am drunk – leave me not from you hand to fall into danger. This is a newborn rule, a newly enacted decree – to shatter glasses, and to fall upon the glassmaker! <EOS>
<BOS> ONCE a beloved asked her lover: “Friend, You have seen many places in the world! Now – which of all these cities was the best? He said: “The city where my sweetheart lives!” <EOS>
<BOS> The springtime of Lovers has come,  that this dust bowl may become a garden;  the proclamation of heaven has come,  that the bird of the soul may rise in flight.  The sea becomes full of pearls,  the salt marsh becomes sweet as kauthar,  the stone becomes a ruby from the mine,  the body becomes wholly soul.  The intellectual is always showing off,  the lover is always getting lost.  The intellectual runs away.  afraid of drowning;  the whole business of love  is to drown in the sea.  Intellectuals plan their repose;  lovers are ashamed to rest.  The lover is always alone.  even surrounded by people;  like water and oil, he remains apart.  The man who goes to the trouble  of giving advice to a lover  get nothing. He’s mocked by passion.  Love is like musk. It attracts attention.  Love is a tree, and the lovers are its shade. <EOS>
<BOS> If anyone asks you how the perfect satisfaction of all our sexual wanting will look, lift your face and say,  Like this.  When someone mentions the gracefulness of the nightsky, climb up on the roof and dance and say,  Like this.  If anyone wants to know what “spirit” is, or what “God’s fragrance” means, lean your head toward him or her. Keep your face there close.  Like this.  When someone quotes the old poetic image about clouds gradually uncovering the moon, slowly loosen knot by knot the strings of your robe.  Like this.  If anyone wonders how Jesus raised the dead, don’t try to explain the miracle. Kiss me on the lips.  Like this. Like this.  When someone asks what it means to “die for love,” point here.  If someone asks how tall I am, frown and measure with your fingers the space between the creases on your forehead.  This tall.  The soul sometimes leaves the body, the returns. When someone doesn’t believe that, walk back into my house.  Like this.  When lovers moan, they’re telling our story.  Like this.  I am a sky where spirits live. Stare into this deepening blue, while the breeze says a secret.  Like this.  When someone asks what there is to do, light the candle in his hand.  Like this.  How did Joseph’s scent come to Jacob?  Huuuuu.  How did Jacob’s sight return?  Huuuu.  A little wind cleans the eyes.  Like this.  When Shams comes back from Tabriz, he’ll put just his head around the edge of the door to surprise us  Like this. <EOS>
